content/blog: Add blog post for GSoC'24: Env Var for Unikraft Builds (#431)
unikraft/docs: content/blog/2024-06-19-gsoc-environment-variables.mdx

---

> title: "GSoC'24: Supporting User-provided, Long-lived Environmental, Variables for Unikraft Builds"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "GSoC'24: Supporting User-provided, Long-lived Environmental Variables for Unikraft Builds"
```

description: |

>   The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's tooling, more especially, the `kraft` command-line too, so that it can dynamically inject user-supplied variables into the build system. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's tooling, more especially, the `kraft` command-line tool, so that it can dynamically inject user-supplied variables into the build system. 
```

publishedDate: 2024-06-19
tags:
- GSoC'24   
- Unikernels
- KraftKit
- Golang
authors:
- Ujjwal Mahar
---

> ## GSoC'24: Supporting User-provided, Long-lived Environmental, Variables for Unikraft Builds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## GSoC'24: Supporting User-provided, Long-lived Environmental Variables for Unikraft Builds
```

<img width="100px" src="https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/assets/media/gsoc-generic-badge.svg" align="right" />

### Project Overview

Unikraft is a highly adaptable cloud-based library operating system with a high degree of modularity.
However, developers' ability to add custom variables to the build process is hampered by the rigidity of the current tooling.

> The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's tooling—more especially, the Kraft command-line tool—so that it can dynamically inject user-supplied variables into the build system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's tooling, specifically the `kraft` command-line tool, so that it can dynamically inject user-supplied variables into the build system.
```
Let's be consistent with how we write `kraft`

Features like changing GCC versions and compile-time settings are included in this.

> Developers can customize Unikraft builds to meet specific needs by providing dynamic configuration, enhancing flexibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers can customize Unikraft builds to meet specific needs by providing dynamic configurations, enhancing flexibility.
```

Impact of this project on the Unikraft Ecosystem:
- Tooling Framework Improvement
- Integration with KraftKit Configuration System
- Modification of Build Invocation Mechanism
- Default Configuration Setting for CC
- Kraftfile Integration
- Dynamic Injection Using Flags in the Command Line

### Progress

Over the past few weeks, I have been following the instructions given by my mentors in the issue [Steps](https://github.com/unikraft/kraftkit/issues/673)
I have completed two of the steps which include:

> 1. **Test Building an Application via Make Setup and Build:**

Reviewer: This needs to be reworded, I'm not sure what you mean by `Setup and Build`

>   Configured the development environment and successfully built a sample Unikraft application using Make.

Reviewer: Briefly mention that the underlying Unikraft build system is Make-based, which is what `kraft` calls into

> 2. **Exploring Different Toolchain Options Toolchain Testing:**

Reviewer: Same as above, needs to be reworded.

>   I have experimented with various GCC versions and compile-time settings by passing different options to the make command, ensuring compatibility and robustness.

Reviewer: I'm not sure `compatibility and robustness` is something your experiment was about. 
Sure, the build system is reliable, but this experiment's goal was rather to give you an idea of how the build system behaves when you inject those options, so that you know what injecting them with kraftkit should behave like.
I would reword this to emphasize why you did this and how it's helpful.

> 

Reviewer: I would add a short section here explaining the reasoning behind going through this process manually.
Why did you test this? Are you more familiar with the build system? How do you think this helps with the project?

### Next Steps 

For the next steps I aim to get started on the actual implementation of the following - 

1. **Hardcode-Inject Toolchain Option:** Hardcode-inject a toolchain option within the KraftKit make package to evaluate its functionality and determine if redesigning is necessary.

> 2. **Global Toolchain Config Variable:** Introduce the Toolchain global config variable to streamline configuration management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Global Toolchain Config Variable:** Introduce the Toolchain global Kraftkit config variable to streamline configuration management.
```

> 3. **Kraftfile Toolchain Element:** Introduce the toolchain element in the Kraftfile, drawing suggestions from previous features like environmental variables and readme elements.

Reviewer: Every other point is formulated as "action: result", so this one stands out to me.
It is also fine as is, I don't have a strong opinion, but I also think you could replace everything after the comma with the benefit of implementing this:
```suggestion
3. **Kraftfile Toolchain Element:** Introduce the toolchain element in the Kraftfile, ... allow per application toolchain options ... .
```
Something along those lines

Reviewer 2: @UjjwalMahar the idea was to write that part yourself, hence the triple dots, not paste with the dots.

4. **CLI Toolchain Options:** Introduce command-line options/commands to set and list toolchain variables, enhancing user control and flexibility.

> 5. **Kraftfile-Level Toolchains:** Implement toolchain definitions at the Kraftfile level to provide even more customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This was slipped on our end when creating the issue. Point 3 and 5 are actually the same thing

However, developers' ability to add custom variables to the build process is hampered by the rigidity of the current tooling.
The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's tooling, specifically the `kraft` command-line tool, so that it can dynamically inject user-supplied variables into the build system.
Features like changing GCC versions and compile-time settings are included in this.
Developers can customize Unikraft builds to meet specific needs by providing dynamic configurations, enhancing flexibility.

Impact of this project on the Unikraft Ecosystem:
- Tooling Framework Improvement
- Integration with KraftKit Configuration System
- Modification of Build Invocation Mechanism
- Default Configuration Setting for CC
- Kraftfile Integration
- Dynamic Injection Using Flags in the Command Line

### Progress

Over the past few weeks, I have been following the instructions given by my mentors in the issue [Steps](https://github.com/unikraft/kraftkit/issues/673)
I have completed two of the steps which include:

1. **Test Building an Application via Make:**
  Configured the development environment and successfully built a sample Unikraft application using Make.

>   It was necessary to have a good understanding of how kraftkit builds and also a necessary step for 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It was necessary to have a good understanding of how Unikraft builds and also a necessary step for 
```

>   [hacking](https://unikraft.org/docs/cli/hacking) in kraftkit.

Reviewer: Please use one line per sentence and one sentence per line

2. **Exploring Different Toolchain Options Toolchain Testing:**
  I have experimented with various GCC versions and compile-time settings by passing different options to the make command.

>   This gave me a better understanding of how to utilize different toolchain options available in kraftkit and would eventually 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This gave me a better understanding of how to utilize different toolchain options in Unikraft and would eventually 
```

>   it would help me with my project.

Reviewer: Please use one line per sentence and one sentence per line

---
title: "GSoC'24: Supporting User-provided, Long-lived Environmental, Variables for Unikraft Builds"
description: |

>   The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's
>   tooling—more especially, the Kraft command-line tool—so that it can dynamically inject
>   user-supplied variables into the build system. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's tooling, more especially, the `kraft` command-line too, so that it can dynamically inject user-supplied variables into the build system. 
```

No need to add spacing

publishedDate: 2024-06-19
tags:
- GSoC'24   

> - Unikernals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Unikernels
```

> - Unikraft

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- KraftKit
```

- Golang
authors:
- Ujjwal Mahar
---

## GSoC'24: Supporting User-provided, Long-lived Environmental, Variables for Unikraft Builds

<img width="100px" src="https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/assets/media/gsoc-generic-badge.svg" align="right" />

### Project Overview

> Unikraft is a highly adaptable cloud-based library operating
> system with a high degree of modularity. However, developers' ability to add custom variables to the build process is hampered
> by the rigidity of the current tooling. The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's
> tooling—more especially, the Kraft command-line tool—so that it can dynamically inject
> user-supplied variables into the build system. Features like changing GCC versions and
> compile-time settings are included in this. Developers can customize Unikraft builds to meet
> specific needs by providing dynamic configuration, enhancing flexibility.

Reviewer 2: Newlines on new sentences only please.

```suggestion
Unikraft is a highly adaptable cloud-based library operating system with a high degree of modularity.
However, developers' ability to add custom variables to the build process is hampered by the rigidity of the current tooling.
The goal of this project is to improve Unikraft's tooling—more especially, the Kraft command-line tool—so that it can dynamically inject user-supplied variables into the build system.
Features like changing GCC versions and compile-time settings are included in this.
Developers can customize Unikraft builds to meet specific needs by providing dynamic configuration, enhancing flexibility.
```

Reviewer 2: Same for other cases

Impact of this project on the Unikraft Ecosystem:
- Tooling Framework Improvement
- Integration with KraftKit Configuration System
- Modification of Build Invocation Mechanism
- Default Configuration Setting for CC
- Kraftfile Integration
- Dynamic Injection Using Flags in the Command Line

### Progress

> Over the past few weeks, I have been following the instructions given by my mentors in the form [Steps](https://github.com/unikraft/kraftkit/issues/673)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Over the past few weeks, I have been following the instructions given by my mentors in the issue [Steps](https://github.com/unikraft/kraftkit/issues/673)
```

I have completed two of the steps which include:

1. **Test Building an Application via Make Setup and Build:**

>    Configured the development environment and successfully built a sample Unikraft application using Make.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Configured the development environment and successfully built a sample Unikraft application using Make.
```

Not sure if 3 spaces are intended?

2. **Exploring Different Toolchain Options Toolchain Testing:**

>      I have experimented with various GCC versions and compile-time settings by passing different options to the make command, ensuring compatibility and robustness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  I have experimented with various GCC versions and compile-time settings by passing different options to the make command, ensuring compatibility and robustness.
```

Not sure if 5 spaces are intended?

### Next Steps 

For the next steps I aim to get started on the actual implementation of the following - 

1. **Hardcode-Inject Toolchain Option:** Hardcode-inject a toolchain option within the KraftKit make package to evaluate its functionality and determine if redesigning is necessary.
2. **Global Toolchain Config Variable:** Introduce the Toolchain global config variable to streamline configuration management.
3. **Kraftfile Toolchain Element:** Introduce the toolchain element in the Kraftfile, drawing suggestions from previous features like environmental variables and readme elements.
4. **CLI Toolchain Options:** Introduce command-line options/commands to set and list toolchain variables, enhancing user control and flexibility.

> 5. **Kraftfile-Level Toolchains:** As a bonus, implement toolchain definitions at the Kraftfile level to provide even more customization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. **Kraftfile-Level Toolchains:** Implement toolchain definitions at the Kraftfile level to provide even more customization.
```
